Description of framnghm.dat

From pp38-38 of 

Statistical Methods in Epidemiology
by H.A. Kahn and C.T. Sempos
Oxford University Press Monographs in Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics Volume 12. New York 1989

with derived variables [##] by jh

Originally thought of as a 20-year study, the population 
under age 30 was excluded because the investigators estimated 
that too few would develop arteriosclerotic or hypertensive 
heart disease before the study's end. By contrast those over 
59 were excluded because too many may already have 
cardiovascular disease at the study's start. A sample size of 
6000 was feasible and estimated to be sufficient for 2000 new 
cases of cardiovascular disease to develop by the end of the 
twentieth year. This number of new cases would be "large 
enough to insure statistically reliable findings" [Dawber et 
al 1951]. Since 6000 was considerably smaller than the town 
population in the target ages, a random sampling plan to 
avoid the unknown bias of self-selection was adopted.

Sampling was based on the annual publication by the Town of 
Framingham of a list of all residents age 20 or over. The 
list was stratified by family size and by precinct of 
residence. Within strata the list was arranged by address. So 
as not to break up families, e.g., include a husband in the 
sample but exclude his wife, sampling selection was of 
families not individuals. Within each stratum, a systematic 
sample of two families was selected from each successive 
group of three families on the list. Everyone aged 30-59 
inclusive in the selected families was considered to be in 
the sample. The prediction was that about 90 percent of the 
selected individuals could be examined. In fact, the 
acceptance rate was 69 percent. When this lower acceptance 
rate became known it was decided to accept additional study 
subjects who were volunteers so as to have an adequate number 
under study. The final study population consisted of 4469 
sample respondents and 740 volunteers. In early publications 
from the study these two groups were shown separately, with 
little important distinction ever noted between them insofar 
as incidence findings are concerned. Not much attention has 
ever been given to Framingham prevalence findings and as 
stated in Chapter 10, the opportunity for biased selection 
when studying prevalence is considerable. The possibility of 
bias is much reduced if the study relates to associations 
with the future occurrence of disease.

The Appendix list represents a further selection of the 
Framingham Heart Study data (sample respondents and 
volunteers combined) When    examinations were made in 1948, 
serum cholesterol was not recognized as a potential risk 
factor. Very many of the first examinations had been 
completed before cholesterol measurements began. Excluded 
from the Appendix are all persons without a serum cholesterol 
value on exam 1 and also all those under age 45 at 
examination 1. We have selected only 13 (including coronary 
heart disease incidence and mortality by cause through 
examination 10) from the 394 variables on the tape provided 
by the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute to provide the 
desired material for comparison of methods and for student 
exercises. Of course, the Appendix is not a random sample of 
the Framingham data for the first 10 examinations 
(examinations were every two years and we have 18 years of 
follow-up), nevertheless it is useful for our specific 
objectives. A description of the 13 variables appears at the 
beginning of the Appendix.

For more complete information on the Framingham sample, see:

Dawber et al 1951 Am J Pub Health 41:279;

Gordon and Kannel 1968 The Framingham Study, Section 1,
National Heart Institute;

Dawber TR 1980. The Framingham Study: The Epidemiology of 
Atherosclerotic Disease. Boston: Harvard University Press..

Appendix

DESCRIPTION OF VARIABLES IN THE Framingham HEART STUDY DATA 
SET

The listing and summary tabulations included herein contain 
data for 13 variables including 18-year follow-up for CHD 
incidence and total mortality. A brief description of the 
definition, coding, and range of values for each variable is 
presented below Where abbreviations are used to describe 
variables, they are shown preceding the variable name. The 
listing is in sequence by age-sex group, within each age-
group by CHD code, and within each CHD code by systolic blood 
pressure on examination 1. For further description and 
discussion of these data, see Gordon and Shurtleff [1973] and  
Shurtleff[1974].

Gordon T and Shurtleff D (1973) The Framingham Study, NIH 
Publication 74-478, Section 29, Department of Health, 
Education and Welfare.

Shurtleff D (1974) The Framingham Study, NIH Publication 74-
599, Section 30, Department of Health, Education and Welfare.

NOTE from JH: Because data were scanned, and touched up by 
hand, there may be some discrepancies from the listing on
pp 247-274 of the Kahn and Sempos book. If you discover any,
please let JH know.


ID       OBS in listing by Kahn and Sempos

CHD      CORONARY HEART DISEASE DIAGNOSIS

         O    No evidence of CHD through examination 10

         1    Preexisting CHD at examination 1 
              (prevalence cases)

         2-10 Examination at which definite CHD is first
              diagnosed (incidence cases). A participant was 
              diagnosed as an incidence case if, after review
              of all available information, a panel of
              investigators agreed upon a definite diagnosis
              of myocardial infarction, coronary
              insufficiency, angina pectoris, or CHD death.

AGE      AGE AT EXAM 1  

           45-62 Age in years (CONTINUOUS) 
		   
AGE_Lo   [##]
         = 45 + INT((AGE-45)/5)*5;  * lower and upper limits    *;
		 
AGE_Up   [##]
         = AGE_L + 4;               * of 5-year age categories  *;
		   

I_male   [##]
         not explicitly included in  Kempos text ... 
         computed by JH from ID

         = 1 (male  )   if ID <= 669
         = 0 (female)   if ID >  669


SBP      SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE, first examiner, EXAM 1

           90-300 mm Hg

SBP10    SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE, first examiner, EXAM 10

           .      Missing data (635 persons)
           94-264 mm Hg


DBP      DIASTOLIC  BLOOD PRESSURE, first examiner, EXAM 1

           50-160 mm Hg

CHOL     SERUM CHOLESTEROL, EXAM 1

           96-430 mg/100 ml

FRW      Framingham RELATIVE WEIGHT, EXAM 1,
         expressed as a percentage

           .      Missing data (11 persons)
           52-222 FRW was calculated from the ratio of the
                  subject's body weight to the median weight
                  for his/her sex-height group.

CIG      NUMBER IF CIGARETTES SMOKED PER DAY, EXAM 1

           .      Missing data (1 person)
           0      No cigarettes smoked
           1-60

YRS_CHD  PERSON YEARS OBSERVATION UNTIL WITHDRAWN
         OR FIRST CHD EVENT

           .      Preexisting CHD at exam 1 (43 not at risk)
           0-18   Years (See * below for how calculated.)

new_chd  [##]
          = . if chd = 1 (i.e., if existing disease at entry)
		  = 0 if chd = 0 
          = 1 if chd >= 2 and chd <= 10
		 
YRS_DTH  PERSON YEARS OBSERVATION FOR MORTALITY

           1-18   Years (See ** below for how calculated.)

DEATH      0      Alive at examination 10
           2-10   First examination that had been scheduled
                  following date of death.
				  
I_dead    [##]
          = 0 (alive) if death = 0
          = 1 (dead)  if death > 0

CAUSE    CAUSE OF DEATH

           .      Missing data (19 persons)
           0      Alive at examination 10
           1      CHD (sudden)
           2      CHD (not sudden)
           3      Stroke
           4      Other cardiovascular disease
           5      Cancer
           6      Other


----------------------------------
* "YRS_CHD" From Ch 7, page 203...

The years of observation regarding development of coronary 
heart disease are shown in the Appendix listings under the 
label YRS_CHD. We remind you that the Framingham examinations 
were approximately two years apart and that incidence cases 
of coronary disease could be identified for the first time 
either on one of the periodic examinations (silent infarct, 
angina pectoris, coronary insufficiency) or during the 
interval between examinations (hospitalization for or death 
from coronary heart disease). We also remind you that the 
Appendix variable labeled CHD is coded O for those remaining 
free of coronary heart disease, 1 for those found to have the 
disease on examination 1 (prevalence cases) and 2-10 for 
those first diagnosed as incidence cases on examinations 2-
10, respectively. For teaching purposes, we have approximated 
and simplified the time under observation as follows:


a If coronary heart disease code is negative,
  i.e., CHD never diagnosed, then 
    YRS_CHD = 2 x (number of the last examination taken - 1).

  Cutting off observation at the time of the last
  examination reflects the fact that occurrence of
  some manifestations of coronary disease after the
  last examination is unlikely to come to the attention
  of the examiners.

b If coronary heart disease code is >= 2,
  i.e., incidence cases,
    YRS_CHD = 2 ( (CHD - 1) - 1 ).

  In this instance we are using the CHD code to
  represent the number of the first examination on which
  diagnosis was made or the number of the first examination
  following interval diagnosis. This formulation presumes
  that disease onset was midway between the examination on
  which diagnosed and the preceding examination.

-----------------------------------------
** "YRS_DTH" From Ch 7, page 203...

The approximate years of observation with respect to 
mortality are shown in the Appendix listings and Appendix 
summary tabulations under the label YRS_DTH. For our purposes 
we have simplified mortality observation on time as follows:

For those not reported dead during the 18-year observation 
period

 YRS_DTH = 18

For those dying during the observation period

 YRS_DTH = 2 x (exam number following date of death - 1) - 1

For a death occurring between scheduled examinations 6 and 7

 YRS_DTH = 2 x (7 - 1) - 1 = 11

This assumes two years between all scheduled examination 
dates and that death occurs only midway between dates.

---
jh 1997.01.05, modified 2001.06.16

